This is my performance assessment from my D205 Data Acquisition course. 

[D205 Performance Assessment document](assets/D205_Pett_PerfAssessment.docx)




Course: Data Acquisition — D205
TGM3 Task 1: Data Acquisition
Student name: Amy Pett
ID number: xxxxxxxxx
Date: 8/7/2024
 

A: Question
I will answer the question “What is the total of emergency admissions for patients who drink soda and have diabetes?” using the medical_data database and the add-on file mservices.csv. This data could hypothetically/potentially be used in a public health campaign aimed at reducing emergency visits among individuals with diabetes who answered ‘Yes’ to drinking soda.
A1: Question Justification
I will first import that mservices.csv file to the medical_data database. I will then run an SQL query in the medical_data database that joins the admissions, patient, and mservices tables.  I will write code to filter a count of emergency admissions per patient that have diabetes and drink soft drinks. These three data points are in each of the three tables, respectively.  
A2: Identifying Data
I have chosen the medical_data database. The tables needed to answer my question are the admissions table (original dataset), patient table (original dataset), and mservices table (which comes from the add-on dataset).  I will create a new table and import the mservices table from the lab files to the original dataset. 
The columns I will need to include in my code will be the primary and foreign keys for the joins and the columns I will use to filter the data.  Those columns that will be the primary/foreign keys are patient_id (from both patient and mservices tables) and admission_id/admis_id (from admission and patient tables).  The columns I will be using in my “Where” statement to filter my data are soft_drink (patient table), diabetes (mservices table), and initial_admin (admission table).

Table	Column	Data Type
patient	patient_id	Text
patient	soft_drink	Text
patient	admis_id	Integer
admission	admins_id	Integer
admission	initial_admin	Text
mservices	patient_id	Text
mservices	diabetes	Text
B: Entity Relationship Diagram
 
B1: Relationship Discussion
The following table lists all the relevant keys from the ERD:
Table	Keys
patient	patient_id
patient	admins_id
admission	admission_id
mservices	patient_id

	The table that shares a relationship with my add-on table is the patient table.  Both the patient and mservices have the patient_id.  In this case, there is a 1:1 relationship between these tables. The patient table has a 1:M relationship to the admission table linked through the admission_id column. The admission and mservices tables do not share any relationships. 
	I did need to manually update my diagram to show a 1:1 relationship between the patient and mservices tables.  PGAdmin only had options to create a 1:M or M:M.  Since those two tables are a 1:1 relationship, I corrected that after taking the screenshot.  When I created the mservices table in PGAdmin I set the patient_id as the primary key of it’s table and the foreign key to the Patient table using patient_id on that table. 
 
B2: Statement for the ERD
This is the SQL code I used to create my add-on table:	
CREATE TABLE mservices
(
     patient_id text NOT NULL,
     Services text,
      Overweight text,
      Arthritis text,
      Diabetes text,
      Hyperlipidemia text,
      BackPain text,
      Anxiety text,
      Allergic_rhinitis text,
      Reflex_esophagitis text,
      Asthma text,
PRIMARY KEY (patient_id),
FOREIGN KEY (patient_id) REFERENCES patient(patient_id)
);

B3: Loading CSV Data
This is the SQL code I used to load the data from the mservices CSV add-on file to my newly created table in the medical_data database:
COPY mservices
FROM 'c:\LabFiles\Medical\mservices.csv'
DELIMITER ','
CSV HEADER;
C: SQL Query
	The following is the SQL code I wrote to answer the question  “What the total of emergency admissions for patients is who drink soda and have diabetes?”:
SELECT admission.initial_admission, patient.soft_drink, mservices.diabetes
FROM patient
JOIN admission
ON patient.admis_id=admission.admins_id
JOIN mservices
ON patient.patient_id=mservices.patient_id
WHERE mservices.diabetes='Yes'
      AND patient.soft_drink='Yes'
      AND admission.initial_admission='Emergency Admission'

C1: CSV Files
See file ‘output.csv’ submitted with this document to verify the resulting data from my query. This is the code I ran to get that file:
COPY (SELECT admission.initial_admission, patient.soft_drink, mservices.diabetes
FROM patient
JOIN admission
ON patient.admis_id=admission.admins_id
JOIN mservices
ON patient.patient_id=mservices.patient_id
WHERE mservices.diabetes='Yes'
AND patient.soft_drink='Yes'
AND admission.initial_admission='Emergency Admission')
TO 'c:\labfiles\outpu.csv'
DELIMITER','
CSV HEADER;

D: Add-on File Time Period
In a business case where this data may be tracked, it would be in tandem with a community health initiative to decrease soda consumption in the general population. Any campaign would take time to put together and then launch.  Health changes will take weeks as well.  A quarterly review of any trends in this data point seems reasonable.
D1: Explanation of Time Period
A common belief is that making a new habit can take at least 21 days.  Health improvements can also take a bit of time to be seen, so it seems unlikely that any changes in the trend will occur in a week or even a month.  A quarterly update, however, allows for habit and health changes without going too long to monitor potential changes in the trend.   
E: Panopto Video
Please follow this link to view my submitted Panopto video showing my SQL code execution and results:
https://d2y36twrtb17ty.cloudfront.net/sessions/e9478de7-6dde-4f04-b539-b2020130a362/0a395dfe-ba62-4bca-a742-b2020130a370-4de9e225-db90-4466-90b3-b2020132d013.mp4?invocationId=0a093cc6-db84-ef11-8293-12b1cb861383

F: Web Sources
Khan, Maham. (n.d.). Joining data in SQL. DataCamp. https://app.datacamp.com/learn/courses/joining-data-in-sql

Ludolf, Jasmin. (n.d.). Intermediate SQL DataCamp. https://app.datacamp.com/learn/courses/intermediate-sql

W3Schools. (n.d.) SQL FOREIGN KEY Constraint.
https://www.w3schools.com/sql/sql_foreignkey.asp
G: Professional Communication




